# Materials / Research / Heating

## Propane

Propane heating is good because it isn't dependent (entirely) on power. Small portable
propane heaters require no power. Propane furnaces require power for their fan and spark
to ignite the furnace, and they also draw power at idle.

Propane doesn't last as long as diesel or gas. But it is much easier to exchange a propane
tank than it is to recharge batteries from solar or a truck's alternator.

Propane is more dangerous than electrical or diesel heating, however. You must vent the
propane container to the outside air. If it's located outside and sparks are nearby, and
the fittings are not properly secured, ignition can occur. (Last year a woman's camper
exploded at burning man because a generator was right next to her propane bottle whose
fitting was leaky)

There are propane furnaces, and smaller propane heaters. The smaller heaters don't have
thermostats, so you have to manually turn them on or off. The larger furnaces do tend
to have thermostats, but are much more expensive.

In general it is recommended to keep two smaller propane bottles rather than one large
propane bottle, so that in winter you can go outside and simply turn a valve when one of
the tanks goes empty. However, most places don't have bottle exchanges for the smaller
tanks, so you will need to find a place that does a refill into your bottle. Also consider
the configuration of the bottle (horizontal or vertical) and how difficult it may be in
your camper to uninstall/install.

Propane will be less efficient in very cold weather, but it will still work, up to a point.
It is suggested to get a heated jacket for the tank so you get the most out of it.


-   Propex: [*https://www.propexheatsource.com/heaters/hs2000-furnace/*](https://www.propexheatsource.com/heaters/hs2000-furnace/)

    -   Has a thermostat

    -   12V Power draw: 1.9A continous running, 0.04A standby

    -   60 CFM

    -   Heat output: 6483 BTU

    -   Make sure to buy a North American version for the correct gas fitting

    -   Exhaust Flue Length: Total combined length must not exceed 4 meters and the inlet pipe should be slightly longer than the exhaust to balance the burner.

    -   Outlets: The maximum recommended is 3, providing the total combined length of ducting is no longer than 5 metres and the maximum length to the first outlet should not exceed 1.5m.



## Diesel/Gas

Heaters exist for both gasoline and diesel sources. Diesel is more efficient and safer.
But gasoline is available more widely (depending on the country...).

Whatever your truck runs on, you can find a heater that uses the same fuel, and you can
run a fuel line from your truck's tank to the heater. However, you should make the fuel
line raise up slightly above the botton of your tank, so you don't accidentally sip all
your truck's fuel.

It's more common for people to bring a container of fuel just for the heater. For safety
this should be located outside the vehicle. Check the heater to see what its rating is for
fuel consumption. They tend to have a high and low mode so fuel consumption may vary.

Some heaters are not designed for high elevation, some need modification to work at high
elevation, and some are designed to operate at all elevations.

In general it's better to run your heater on high mode as it will create less carbon
build-up. Build-up inside the unit can stop the heater, requiring maintenance.


### Notes

-   [*https://www.amazon.com/Eberspacher-Airtronic-Heater-Kit-Gasoline/dp/B0BF12GBN3*](https://www.amazon.com/Eberspacher-Airtronic-Heater-Kit-Gasoline/dp/B0BF12GBN3)

    -   "The Eberspacher B2L is engineered to operate in extreme conditions and high altitudes. It can operate in temperatures as low as -46°C / - 50°F and at altitudes of up to 18K feet.  This is possible thanks to its integrated altitude sensor, and unlike earlier models there is no additional wiring or installation required for high altitude operation."

-   [*https://velitcamping.com/products/velit-gasoline-air-heater-17000btu*](https://velitcamping.com/products/velit-gasoline-air-heater-17000btu)

    -   "With the built-in barometer, the Velit air heater has the industry\'s highest elevation rating (16000ft) so you will have warm air wherever you go. The barometer inside the controller senses the air pressure and adjusts the air-fuel mix ratio accordingly to provide better high-elevation performance and reduce carbon build-up."

    -   It seems stupid cheap, but their videos seem legit [*https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dbkrt9UIC8M*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dbkrt9UIC8M)

    -   [*https://www.fordtransitusaforum.com/threads/anybody-heard-of-velit-camping-a-c-manufacturer.90720/*](https://www.fordtransitusaforum.com/threads/anybody-heard-of-velit-camping-a-c-manufacturer.90720/)

    -   [*https://youtu.be/WQ8tLMiY5D0?si=EnzxDGPGafk8kS6v*](https://youtu.be/WQ8tLMiY5D0?si=EnzxDGPGafk8kS6v)

-   [*https://www.esparparts.com/products/espar-m2-b4l-commercial-ford-transit?sca_ref=6538554.gbGz1thtUJ*](https://www.esparparts.com/products/espar-m2-b4l-commercial-ford-transit?sca_ref=6538554.gbGz1thtUJ)

-   [*https://www.amazon.com/Webasto-Gasoline-including-Controller-9030910A/dp/B07X6H2TMJ?&linkCode=sl1&tag=engineerswhov-20&linkId=7d24018e32488899e3ae7b6001f98648&language=en_US&ref\_=as_li_ss_tl*](https://www.amazon.com/Webasto-Gasoline-including-Controller-9030910A/dp/B07X6H2TMJ?&linkCode=sl1&tag=engineerswhov-20&linkId=7d24018e32488899e3ae7b6001f98648&language=en_US&ref_=as_li_ss_tl)

-   [*https://www.amazon.com/Eberspacher-Airtronic-B4-Installation-Controller/dp/B0068M7S6I*](https://www.amazon.com/Eberspacher-Airtronic-B4-Installation-Controller/dp/B0068M7S6I)

-   Heatso - UK vendor, bad reviews, dont buy

    -   [*https://www.heatso.com/espar-airtronic-b2l-as3-petrol-12v-2kw-kit/*](https://www.heatso.com/espar-airtronic-b2l-as3-petrol-12v-2kw-kit/)

    -   [*https://www.heatso.com/espar-eberspacher-airtronic-b4l-am3-petrol-12v-4kw-heater-kit-2021-model/*](https://www.heatso.com/espar-eberspacher-airtronic-b4l-am3-petrol-12v-4kw-heater-kit-2021-model/)

-   [*https://nomadicsupply.com/espar-airtronic-as3-b2l-12v-petrol-air-heater-kit-w-easy-start-pro/*](https://nomadicsupply.com/espar-airtronic-as3-b2l-12v-petrol-air-heater-kit-w-easy-start-pro/)

-   [*https://thermokingmichigan.com/products/espar-air-heaters/*](https://thermokingmichigan.com/products/espar-air-heaters/)

-   [*https://www.amazon.com/Webasto-Gasoline-including-Controller-9030910A/dp/B07X6H2TMJ?&linkCode=sl1&tag=engineerswhov-20&linkId=7d24018e32488899e3ae7b6001f98648&language=en_US&ref\_=as_li_ss_tl*](https://www.amazon.com/Webasto-Gasoline-including-Controller-9030910A/dp/B07X6H2TMJ?&linkCode=sl1&tag=engineerswhov-20&linkId=7d24018e32488899e3ae7b6001f98648&language=en_US&ref_=as_li_ss_tl)

-   [*https://www.heatso.com/espar-vs-webasto*](https://www.heatso.com/espar-vs-webasto)

-   [*https://www.amazon.com/Eberspacher-Airtronic-Heater-Kit-Gasoline/dp/B0BF12GBN3*](https://www.amazon.com/Eberspacher-Airtronic-Heater-Kit-Gasoline/dp/B0BF12GBN3)

-   Espar

    -   [*https://eberspacherdirect.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/10/25.2953.90.0001.0A_EN_1222.pdf*](https://eberspacherdirect.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/10/25.2953.90.0001.0A_EN_1222.pdf)

    -   [*https://www.butlertechnik.com/downloads/cms/eberspacher-espar-airtronic-s3-d2l-b2l-workshop-repair-manual.pdf*](https://www.butlertechnik.com/downloads/cms/eberspacher-espar-airtronic-s3-d2l-b2l-workshop-repair-manual.pdf)

    -   [*https://www.eberspaecher-climate.com/fileadmin/data/csp/pdf/ProductSheets_new_EN/Airtronic_S3M3_Data_sheet_EN.pdf*](https://www.eberspaecher-climate.com/fileadmin/data/csp/pdf/ProductSheets_new_EN/Airtronic_S3M3_Data_sheet_EN.pdf)

    -   Airtronic S3 B2L

        -   12V, 11W low, 26W high, \<80W starting

        -   2K BTU

        -   0.14 -- 0.26 liters/hour

        -   -40 to +50 Celsius

        -   2.5 Kg

        -   310x115x122

        -   100 kg/hr heat flow rate

        -   Automatic altitude adjustment up to 5,500 m

        -   Flexible installation with 90° tilt possible to either side

-   Air

    -   Exhaust

        -   The exhaust outlet must be arranged so as to prevent any penetration of exhaust fumes into the vehicle interior through the ventilation system, warm air intakes or open windows.

    -   Combustion air intake

        -   The air for the heater\'s combustion chamber may not be drawn in from the vehicle\'s passenger compartment. The air intake must be arranged or protected in such a way that it cannot be blocked by other objects.

    -   Hot air intake

        -   The hot air supply must consist of fresh air or circulated air and must be drawn in from a clean area, which cannot be contaminated by exhaust fumes from the engine, the combustion heater or any other source in the vehicle.

-   Someone has suggested that at high altitude, bigger ducting (75+) is better, because it lets more oxygen in, otherwise you can have overheating issues

-   It occurred to me you need battery to operate the heater... in Winter... so what happens when you run out of battery, and how are you going to charge your battery in Winter? Solar? Fat chance.  Alternator? Not without a second one. So shore power or genny would be the only options.

    -   It could be that propane heating is just more reliable in winter, because I don't need a fan to run a Mr. Buddy.

        -   So seriously consider a spot outside to put a 20lb propane tank.

        -   And estimate how long I could run a heater on it, compared to my big-ass battery bank with the Espar or Velit.


